[Music]
everybody welcome to another episode of
conversations with Tom I am here with
Nicholas Christakis before we started
rolling we were speaking Greek it's it
is so rare for me to get a chance to
speak Greek so thank you for being kind
and fighting through my my deep American
accent but your senses were
chromatically so that was good all right
it's a step in the right direction yeah
it's interesting because my wife is
actually Cypriot so already I'm trying
to show to fake a Greek accent and not
sound like a super8 which my wife so
this is coming from a Cypriot says
they're sort of the the country people
and already they themselves have an
accent so yes it is not easy to be
understood and it's really rare here in
Los Angeles to find people that speak
Greek it's a little bit easier in New
York but without getting to loss on that
tangent so one thing that I find just
really fascinating in life is the notion
of how much of us is born and how much
of us is made and you sit at that
intersection the book blueprint that you
wrote about the evolution of culture
which I'm not sure you would explain it
that simply but I'll round it to that
just to get it started
what drew you to that notion of how much
culture itself evolves and stacks on
itself well that's that was certainly
one motivation for the book and in fact
as you mentioned I try to explain what
are the evolutionary origins of our
capacity for culture I mean why why are
we a cultural animal at all I mean the
and so this thing that allows us to be
so variable from person to person and
from place to place this capacity for
variation which we take is so important
is actually how to put this exactly is
actually fixed so there's this kind of
irony that that the very capacity we
have to be so different from place to
place is actually a capacity that
unifies us that all human beings share
this capacity for culture and so that
one of the ways that if I could just
step back even from that just a moment
it's it's every animal almost every
animal can learn from its environment so
an animal you know little fish in the
sea can learn that if it swims up to the
light it will find food there and that's
independent learning where an animal on
its own can learn some animals learn
socially so for example I see you put
your hand in the fire and I learn you
know you burn yourself so you've learned
independently like the fish swimming you
put your another fire you learn that you
burn but I can watch you put your hand
in the fire and now I get almost as much
knowledge fire burns but I paint none of
the price my hand isn't burnt or I can
watch you eat red berries and you die
and I'm like oh my god I'm not going to
eat red berries and so that's an
incredibly efficient form of learning
social learning imitation observation of
other members some animals learn
socially we do it chimpanzees do it
certain other animals species do it can
learn socially from watching each other
but we do something even more
extraordinary is we teach each other
things we set out to affirmative ly
teach let me show you how to build a
fire and that is exceedingly rare we do
it again certain other primate species
do it elephants do it which is kind of
interesting and in certain ways not
quite like we do and there's some
thinking that certain dolphins species
do it as well
anyway that capacity for teaching and
learning and for accumulating knowledge
and spreading it across time and place
is what gives us the capacity for
culture so it's one of the tensions and
irony's in the book and because as your
listeners may know there's like the
people think of like evolutionary
biologists explaining human behavior or
evolutionary psychologists explaining it
and anthropologists and other people who
are interested in in culture as like
fighting with each other like and and
this group is is interested in
universals and what all humans have in
common and this group is interested in
variation and how every group is
different
actually you can unify those ideas if
you realize that we evolved to have the
capacity to be different now what is it
so you're a super smart dude you write
you said basically a book every 10 years
why are you so drawn to this particular
thing I've become obsessed with it
because I grew up feeling that I was not
as smart as the people around me that I
was maybe gonna struggle to do the
things that I wanted to do in life and
that a couple life instances led me to
really feel like I was never gonna go
anywhere with my life and so that had me
sliding towards depression and it was
beginning to read about brain science
and realizing actually hold on the same
called brain plasticity actually when I
was first started reading about it it
was hotly debated and I just chose to
believe that that was going to prove out
to be true and so really leaned into
that and and my life has changed
radically as a result of me putting time
and energy into skill acquisition what
what has made this such an important
obsession for you was it something in
the way you were raised was it something
you came across well first of all I
became obsessed with the topic of this
book for other reasons one was to try to
make an extended argument about our
common humanity and the fact that human
beings around the world are there's more
that unites us than divides us I saw it
going in a problematic direction yeah
because I thought for too long
scientists and people on the street had
been obsessed with the bad part of our
nature and the evolution of of
selfishness and violence and cruelty and
mendacity and and warfare now but but
but equally we evolved to be good we
didn't just evolve to have these awful
qualities we've all to have the capacity
for love and friendship and cooperation
and teaching which we already discussed
and all these wonderful qualities and in
fact these wonderful qualities I would
argue are more powerful than the
negative qualities they had to be
otherwise we wouldn't be living socially
in the first place in other words if
every time I came near you you were
violent to me or you filled me with
false information about the environment
you lied to me or or you you killed me I
would be better off not a pro
we would all be better off living you
know as atomistic independent
individuals but that's not what we do we
live socially and so the question is how
and why did we do that and what forces
counteract these negative forces but I
actually want to come back to the other
thing you said about struggling with
one's fate but we can come back to that
if you want we can keep going on now I
love that tactic but one thing I want to
ask you about so I think most people
watching this if they have any name
recognition with you they will certainly
know about the whole thing happened at
Yale you were sort of the famous guy at
the center of that the what I will call
a sense of hysteria and were you already
researching this book like here is a guy
who is really intrigued by this notion
of people are talking way too much about
the negativity of what pulls us apart he
starts because you're nine minutes an
hour difference is everyone is
interested people seem to think that
what's important about us is is our
sexual identity or our ethnicity or our
immigration status or our racial
background or our socio-economic class
or all these differences between people
which I don't negate that is to say I
recognize that these differences exist
but to me that's not what's interesting
about human beings what's interesting is
what we all have in common and in fact
it's the it's the fact that we all have
these things in common the fact that we
are united in my view by our common
humanity that allows us to bridge these
divides in other words if you think that
your life experience is dictated by your
membership in groups you know whether
you're a an Eagles fan
for example or you know whether you're
in the army or in the Navy or all of
these distinctions that we make if you
if you think that you're your identity
in life or your feelings your thoughts
are specified by your membership in
groups then why on earth do you
communicate or talk to me at all in
other words you must believe as I do I
hope people believe this that that we
can we can be we can talk across these
divides that you know that we are you
know you know united by our common
humanity and so so that's a
philosophical principle but it's also as
I discuss in the book a scientifically
grounded
set of ideas and yes I started this book
in in 2009 and the events the Halloween
costume events of 2015
you know reinforce although they were
unpleasant very unpleasant events and
and I think many people lost their minds
I it didn't it didn't degrade my
fascination and admiration for our
species and affection for our species
and so so I rushed to finish the book
actually yeah that that is that brings
up a few interesting things so one when
I think about what I'm trying to do with
my life so I'm trying to basically build
the next Disney which most people don't
see that side of what we're doing
because it is so much harder and takes
so much more time and I was literally to
day asking myself like why am i spending
so much time and energy on this it is so
stressful it is it asks a lot of me both
in terms of my time and energy but my
finances like everything this is it's a
huge undertaking and the answer that
I've always come back to is hi it's the
only way that I think I personally meet
on bill you can influence culture like
when I think about what are the things
that really are going to determine the
way that somebody thinks so my core
thesis is right now your zip code
determines it is more predictive of your
future success in your IQ I find that
like really troubling so what are the
things that make your zip code so
powerful it's going to be obviously the
the way that the culture around you
thinks that becomes the most problematic
thing to put the finger on it and so I
thought okay what are ways that I can
influence that I can't change who your
parents are I can't change who your
friends are but I can change the way or
I can change the ideas that get embedded
in pop culture and because my background
is storytelling I went to film school
that was my obsession learning the
language of story I just thought okay I
have a passion for this I love it I
understand it could it really have a
meaningful impact on that is that part
of why you wanted to get this book out
is to change the conversation that's
going on
yes in part I wanted to get people
focused on again what we have in common
two aspects of that first of all our
common humanity in the sense that we
what we share in common but second when
you hear the term our common humanity
you typically think about good things I
mean there's also bad parts of our
common humanity but but we think about
good things and I and I want people to
be thinking that way I want you know
like everyone most adults have had this
experience of traveling to another place
it could be another town or another
state or another country and when you
first go especially if you go to a far
away place when you first get there you
think oh my goodness this is so
different people are dressed differently
and they worship different gods and they
smell differently and they eat different
foods and their cities their language is
different and you know everything is so
different you think and then you spend
some time there and you see that oh my
goodness these people are just like me
they they laugh at jokes they spend time
with their families they have friends
which they derive satisfaction from they
cooperate with each other to achieve
collective objectives there are all
these fundamentally human things that we
do as an animal because ironically
ironically these most human things of us
about us actually we can identify them
in part because they're so animalistic
because they evolved in our biology and
one of the arguments for instance I make
in the book is that if we can share the
capacity for friendship with elephants
because elephants also have friends they
evolved independently from us to have
friendships and elephants social
networks look just like our social
networks even though the last common
ancestor we had with elephants about 90
million years ago didn't have social
networks so the elephants independently
by something known as convergent
evolution just like those famous
examples of the of the armadillos and
the pangolins you know that
independently come to look similar you
know with but completely independently
they have all these capacities so but
you can involve not just physical traits
to look similar you can evolve behavior
so elephants and we independently
evolved friendship and so one of the
ironies is if we look at elephants and
say oh my goodness elephants have
friends too
if we share this trait in common with
elephants then we can share it with each
other do you see that video of the
elephant that I think pretty recent an
elephant was friends with a dog the dog
died and the elephant carried the dog
back a mile and a half after being
attacked by coyotes to lay it down
outside the house and like show signs of
continual mourning over the loss of that
dog dude I thought that is fascinating I
have not seen that video but the ability
of elephants to feel grief which I also
discuss in the book blueprint has been
long known by indigenous people in
Africa and long observed by scientists
as well and it's a very it's a very
interesting property and we we know that
elephants can express something that
looks just like grief and us and so why
did elephants
apparently independently evolved this
capacity for grief
well the capacity for grief is the
flipside of the capacity to be attached
to individual people so you might be sad
if you see that a stranger has died but
you won't grieve the death of that
stranger if a person you know an
identifiable unique individual dies you
feel grief and so this capacity for
grief evolved I believe and I argue in
the book in parallel with the capacity
to express individual identity so what
do I mean by that why for instance I'll
back up if I could why why do all of our
faces look different I mean why don't we
all just have a face that looks the same
for for your kidneys to do their job all
human kidneys to do their job properly
should work the same physiologically
they should be the same but for faces to
do their job they should look different
and what is the job of your face the job
of your face is to communicate this is
me not someone else you're trying to
communicate your individual identity and
not only that not only do we does and
and this the genetics of this have
recently been worked out or partially
worked out like how our face has come
all of our faces to be different we
don't only have the capacity to signal
our uniqueness we also have the capacity
to recognize
our uniqueness a large part of our brain
is devoted to being able to look out at
a crowd of people and uniquely identify
every one of them even we can look out
at people we've never met before and say
these two are siblings so we can discern
a connection between them by looking at
their faces
telephone I have that that same gas
ability yes yes yes interesting so yes
so elephants have identity and
incidentally so do dolphins and and and
of course many primates so they are
unique individuals now the reason for
the evolution of this capacity to signal
and detect individual identity is that
paradoxically it's because we live
socially if if you're gonna live
socially you need to have a way of
tracking who have you had sex with where
you cooperated with no seriously who is
your offspring like you want to feed
your child not someone else's child so
you need to be able to tell the
difference among all of these other
people who do you owe a favor to who can
you call on for support if you are in a
battle so all of these qualities rely on
these social qualities rely on our
capacity to signal our individual
identity and then comes with that the
capacity for grief
so you mourn when when Suzy or Tommy
dies you don't mourn when some unnamed
person dies because they are unique to
you and you have a connection to them so
so this is grief anyway so I'm not
surprised at all about that they and
also elephants into the incidentally of
another fascinating trait is they seem
to hate animals that eat carrion so they
shoo away if they find a dead animal on
the savanna and they're vultures there
they will run at the vultures inch or
the hyenas and they will chase them away
they they really don't like those kinds
of animals they apparently think they're
awful and they have been known to help
humans in distress so they can tell the
difference an elephant can tell the
difference between a human that is sick
and a human that is not and help a human
that is sick incidentally dolphins have
been known to do this you know to their
famous stories going back thousands
of years many many documented in modern
times some of this is discussed in the
book - where dolphins will rescue
drowning sailors and and take them along
distance to shore dude I used to ever
watch that show flipper yeah a little
bit yeah I loved that surprise that that
whole notion of it you know the dolphin
being there to help people out like that
is how I grew up thinking about dolphins
is that they had very human-like traits
the ability to understand the stress the
willingness to rescue somebody pretty
interesting I didn't know that about
elephants especially when they're so
notorious for I would assume if they
detect that you are a threat that they
are so devastatingly vicious is the word
I would have used before you said that
that they can that they'll go on the
attack
with humans aren't they one of the
number one killers of humans in terms of
animals ancestrally there was no
conflict between before we developed
serious weapons we there were group
hunts for Mastodon and elephant
predecessors a long time ago so we
occasionally would hunt we have large
groups to people that's dangerous for us
to hunt an elephant was not an easy
thing but there was no like intrinsic
conflict between our ancestor and given
the ivory trade and given the conversion
of land to agriculture the elephants and
humans come into conflict and an unarmed
human of course is nothing against an
elephant and you see occasionally in
India you know people go running when
they see an elephant I mean it's not a
joke and but they're peaceful I mean
they don't intrinsically attack us not
at all and but they sometimes engage in
cooperating or this goes back to our
discussion of culture so elephants will
teach each other how to raid human crops
and they know for example to do the raid
on on nights when there's a new moon and
they and they and they and yes and they
and they have special knowledge about
which crops are appealing and where they
are located which they remember and
transmit so they'll form parties
to go like hunting parties to go on a
dark night and then to get you know the
desired food of course the humans don't
like this so because you know the
elephants will trash the whole field but
um no it's quite remarkable what they
can do
anyway that's discussed in the book -
one of the things that um I I want to go
deeper into is is grief man like grief
is who that is a crazy part of the human
experience and when you see footage of
somebody throwing themselves on a casket
and wailing and you know so intimately
that sense of just devastating loss like
I'm never going to be able to go on from
this even having the concept of dying
from a broken heart is is pretty intense
that that whole thing man about humans
is is [__] crazy and what we will do
to avoid it how far we will go when
we're in the grips of it yeah it's
pretty intense if you've never yeah if
you've never had grief first of all I
was a hospice doctor for many years so I
took care of people who were dying and
I've personally experienced grief my
mother died when I was 25 she'd been
sick my whole childhood is that part of
why you became a hospice doctor yeah of
course of course it's another whole log
story we'd go on that tangent if you
want in fact I already I'm remembering
two tangents ago I eventually I might
circle back to you but but um no I think
that's that feeling it's a very physical
feeling like your your chest aches and
and and you want to you want to UM hurt
yourself you know pull out your hair and
why the [__] is that that's so true I
have literally never put that into a
thought before why on earth do we do
that we we don't know without
self-injury covering yourself with ash
not eating it's a very complicated thing
and and and and the thing is typically
human beings don't experience grief very
often that's why it's so distinctive
it's not like just bad sadness it's a
different feeling and while most people
have are familiar with sadness and you
know anger and depression and you know
human beings have these feelings grief
is a rare emotion in part again because
it's tied to particular people and
also too permanent so for example right
now during the corona virus pandemic
incidentally I'm writing another book
about this called Apollo's arrow that's
coming out in October but um that's
faster time for you I'm impressed yes I
very unexpectedly decided to do it but
there's a lot of grief related to this
not just because people have lost their
lives and when you and I are speaking
about a hundred thousand Americans have
lost their lives that means probably
about a million Americans know that
those people and are grieving and
probably 10 million Americans are aware
of someone who has died but as the
pandemic claims more and more lives more
and more people will either know someone
who died and be grieving that person or
be aware let us say know personally not
in other words I'm making a distinction
between you're intimate with someone
your family member a close friend versus
oh I know this person and all my
goodness they died so that's gonna
change in our society over the coming
year or two as the pandemic becomes
continues and and grief is gonna be part
of it but we don't just have grief for
the loss of life we also have grief for
the loss of our way of life right
there's a sense in which some things
have been permanently lost people who
graduated from high school and college
this spring did not have commencements
people have lost their jobs people have
lost their careers they've lost the
opportunities to get have a wedding you
know like they had wanted planned a
wedding and these are non-trivial losses
and sometimes you can think of these as
eliciting grief because one of the
qualities of grief is that the you it's
focused on something distinctive and
something that is basically permanently
gone right like that's why you feel
grief that it'll never come back and so
I think there's gonna be a lot of grief
as part of this pandemic as well man I'd
I'd love to know if you have insights
into when I think about grief I there
the the the wailing the chest pounding
the hair-pulling there when I
I literally sit here and think about
what that feels like there is this need
to move to do something to know like if
there's some association between
movement or aggression
the the it feels like to your notion of
permanence it feels like I I so cannot
deal with the fact that this is
permanent that I need to to change the
state of something else I need to change
my own state like the the notion there
was this book I read in high school the
breakers or something like that was
about people who wanted to destroy and
tear things down and I remember reading
it going I [__] get this like I get
the impulse you have to break something
too but I don't know that it's it
I didn't resonate with it in the sense
of I want to watch it burn I resonated
with it in the sense of like changing
its state like just dramatically getting
your hands in it breaking it there is
something freakishly cathartic about
that and I don't know if there's you
know back to my central obsession with
you and your work is 50% you're born
with and 50% is changeable and it feels
like that collision of something in your
subconscious is like coughing up into
your conscious mind and the only way to
deal with it is through movement which
obviously as a species we've been I mean
some say that we have a brain
specifically for movement well first of
all generally in grief it's not a period
of movement so usually people when they
grieve stay home they might stay in bed
their their emotions become their
motions become slowed don't you should
do you think that we pass through though
a more a violent phase of that in the
beginning that certainly is my
experience you know it's possible so yes
so there's a rage component too often at
the imminent loss so often people for
example if their if their loved one is
sick and dying they will feel a kind of
rage about that and and and and you also
incidentally see that a lot when people
you know when people engage in mass
killings in our society it's often
because they feel hopeless and they want
to burn at all you know which is a kind
of you know extreme manifestation of
what we're discussing but but generally
after the death of the person most
people do not but not to say everyone
but most people in
my experience the grieving is a kind of
period of subdued expenditure of effort
and many religions of course for example
in Judaism you sit Shiva for instance in
Islam there's a lot of traditions about
how you wash the body and rituals
funeral rituals and so forth and
Christianity of course the same so there
are many Hinduism Buddhism there are all
these religions have have rituals that
also partly are directed at at
supporting the person who's suffering
and grieving but also reconnecting them
to the broader society because you know
a tie has been cut so there's a lot of
visitation and and at an attention for
example in chimpanzees when when when
one chimpanzees loved one dies other
chimpanzees will come and groom the
grieving chimp more and there'll be more
you know social engagement in an attempt
to reconnect a person to their to their
and and and incidentally there been some
there's been some observations in chimps
about body washing like like like
mothers of chimps that babies that die
will tenderly prepare the body of their
baby the same thing has been seen
incidentally in killer whales where
mother killer whales will try to carry
the body of their dead offspring for a
long time and move it to the surface to
breathe and so forth so maybe you see a
black fish yes I did oh good lord the
part where they the guy is recount and
he seems like a tough nut the tough nut
grizzled guy talking about you know back
in the 70s or whatever when they
captured him and they were showing the
footage and he was she breaks down
crying talking about how the whales were
screaming and they wouldn't leave as
they were harvesting young and I was
like oh God like that is yes yes that's
an excellent example that's exactly
right and old whalers would do awful
things I mean they were whalers but you
know and we you know in the intervening
centuries we've come progressively to be
more humane about animals I think is
terrific and incidentally more humane
about each other to as many people have
argued over the last couple hundred
years
generally speaking the the moral sphere
has widened you know it used to be just
us and now more and more groups count as
being important which is good
eventually including animals the Whalers
would do things like like a kill the
young calves or injured the young calves
so that it would draw other animals
together and there's one awful story I
can't remember if I put it in the book
and I don't remember where I got it
but these the orcas are very smart and
they were being printed
there was a pod of orcas and they were
being predator
with harpoons in a boat like a modern
humans not into it hunters and uh and
the orcas seem to form a plan where the
the females and the children went down
one branch of a river and the male's
tried to draw the humans away from their
how to put it there women [__] you know
and young unbelievable like they clearly
know you know so yeah I mean it's it's
it's you know these are these these
these other animals these sentient
social intelligent long-lived all of
those qualities go together animals are
very similar to us in these same
fundamental ways ironically that define
our common humanity I don't know we got
we just got just one grief and I forgot
how we got on down this tangent well
even before we leave that one thing I
would love to understand why did you
stop being a hospice doctor which I I
could not fathom doing for even a day so
you were about me gonna get in well I am
for many reasons some personal some
administrative or practical or
professional so I I practice as a home
hospice physician in Chicago from 1995 I
finished my medical training in 1995
when I was about 33 and then I started
at the University of Chicago and then I
work as a home hospice physician taking
care of people on the south side of
Chicago home based hospice so I would on
Saturday afternoons I would go to
people's homes of people who were dying
and take care of
them and their families as best I could
I was part of a hospice called horizon
hospice in Chicago even though I was at
the University of Chicago Medical Center
and then in 2001 I moved to Harvard and
then I I worked there as a palliative
medicine physician initially on the
scale of Medicine Service a hospice
service at Mass General Hospital and
then I moved to the Mount Auburn
Hospital and about 10 years ago now so
it would have been what was it exactly
it was
or maybe 2010 or something like that I I
finally stopped seeing patients I did it
for a number reasons first of all I had
I had taken on some additional
responsibilities at Harvard in fact I
was the so called master of just like at
Yale with a Halloween it's spent
at Harvard with greater success I had
been the so-called master of one of the
houses so called it at Harvard for for
four years or so and that was important
and heavy duty and so I didn't have time
to continue my clinical practice my
laboratory was taking off we were doing
a lot more science in my lab and it
needed my attention and then I had some
logistic issues like traveling around
the city it was just was spending so
much of my time going from place to
place oh so that's one of the reasons I
gave it up another reason was that um
and this will take a minute to explain
so when I so when I first started
practicing hospice medicine in 1995
there wasn't even a specialty in a board
certification yet in hospice care and
the care of Americans then as now was
abysmal so you may your listeners may
not know this but something like half of
Americans died in pain we're the richest
nation on earth
whoa and half of Americans die in pain
between 40 and 70 percent then and still
and it and and we have other awful
things so most of us want to die at home
many of us most of us cannot you know I
you know many of us have extended
hospitalizations before we die which is
unnecessary or or or other kinds we have
a lot of suffering before we die and so
I was you know very angry about this and
very concerned about this and I my
initial part of my career I did a lot of
research about how to improve
end-of-life care in our society but I
was all
practicing hospice physician but in 1995
the Maine patients I was asked to see
were patients let's say in their 60s and
70s and 80s who were dying of solid
tumors like colon cancer or breast
cancer or prostate cancer or lung cancer
that was metastatic and you need to
understand that most of the time 95% of
the pain that we feel is what's called
somatic pain when a tissue in our body
is affected and the nerves detect the
pain and tell our brain this part hurts
there's a different kind of pain called
neuropathic pain that's when the nerve
itself is affected and the nerve is
screwed up not the tissue that the nerve
is detecting but the nerve itself let's
say is being invaded by a tumor it's
called neuropathic pain so the patient's
I was taking care of in my er in my 30s
were older than me they were dying of
somatic pain which you can easily treat
with morphine and uh and I could help
the families and the patients easily and
enormous ly so I could go to a patient's
bedside things were a mess no one had
talked to them about the fact that they
were dying no one had prepared the
family the patient was in pain I could
give them morphine and just sit there
and if you gave it intravenously it's
unbelievable you just just the morph no
it's unbelievable the patient's in agony
and they want to die because they're in
so much pain and you relieve their pain
and I'm like actually not so bad Wow
and and I and you feel so powerful and
so physician Lee you know you feel like
you're doing some good in the world
using this very simple drug and of
course they're more complicated tricks
up your sleeve because often pain is
very easy to treat but there are other
symptoms believe it or not like
constipation or dyspnea shortness of
breath is awful at the end of life or
itching which is very hard to treat to
really affect people a lot and they're
miserable from these symptoms and those
are harder to treat but anyway so
typically I would be taking care of
someone much older than me with a
somatic pain and with a
a family situation that required me to
prepare them from like let's say a
natural end to a decently long life okay
1995 that's my practice well what
happened in the intervening 10 years or
15 years is progressively a lot of these
principles got filtered back to other
doctors in the hospital so other doctors
became better at using morphine prior to
1995 doctors were afraid to use it they
didn't know how to use it they thought
if they gave the patient a milligram or
two of morphine they would die just
wrong you know they didn't know they
were afraid to talk to patients about
death and dying so they would call us to
do it because we were the experts so we
would just go and basically sit and
listen which was you know the skill
that's required so but but eventually
those skills moved correctly and
wonderfully moved to the rest of the
medical system pain became a fifth vital
sign up until that point we had heart
rate temperature respiratory rate and
blood pressure were the four vital signs
it was a big move in the 1990s to add a
fifth one pain so at the foot of your
bed the nurse is recording five vital
signs now more like how much pain are
you in and the idea there was if you ask
the patient every day are they in pain
they can't tell you it's an eight out of
ten three days in a row and you don't do
anything about it you know you you have
to address it so so all of that stuff
filters back so what happened as a
result is my personal practice changed
and I got older so I went from being 35
to being 45 and now I was being asked to
see a 32 year old woman younger than me
dying of metastatic ovarian cancer
metastatic to her a sacral plexus the
nerves at the base of your spine having
neuropathic pain which I couldn't easily
treat and three small children at home
so how can I tell her help her to accept
death you know so the caseload became
much much much harder honestly and do
you talk to somebody like that about
death I mean that that is when when I
heard that you were a hospice doctor I
thought dude you are meeting people at
the worst period in their life obviously
their family's worst period I mean this
is like it would be hard
to go home my laughs yes yes well many
many professions have that you know
police firemen nurses oncology nurses
burn burn unit nurses you know people
who coroner's you know they're many
professions in our life in our society
which involve contact with with sadness
and pain and and and challenging you
know very challenging situations or
soldiers for goodness sakes you know who
return from battle can have PTSD and so
on so so it is difficult but you of
course you're human and you are entitled
it's your job you know and this is what
you signed up for and you then are
entitled also to go home and have a
normal day and and be pissed off while
you wait in line at the post office like
anyone else or be happy because you're
hugging your kids like anyone else so
yes you can compartmentalize and most
people do some people do burn out in all
the professions I mentioned and many
others and then they switch professions
you know it's it's too much for them
after a while so you said like listening
go ahead yeah I was just gonna say you
said that listening was a key part of
talking to somebody about that is it
just that is there a universal thing
that people want to talk about is that
they just need to to be heard to be with
somebody or are there actual things you
need to impart know many people want to
tell their life story near the end of
life this is a very common experience
and they want to talk to their families
about it and they sometimes they want to
talk to their health care providers
about it and sometimes it's it
interesting I mean there's some law
among hospice nurses I don't know maybe
I don't know how your reach is and how
many hospice nurses are listening to
this but if when they hear this they're
all going to nod their heads and that
you know that often it's it's a bad
prognostic sign you know the patients
will be not doing so well and then
they'll perk up and they'll be very
chatty and they'll tell you about their
life story and then the next day they
die and and you know i I've never seen
any formal scientific study of this
phenomenon but I certainly have
experienced it myself and it's certainly
a lure in hospices that often
when the person engages in that kind of
life review especially if they were
failing and then they kind of perk up to
do it it's like a sign of death coming
so um no I think people first of all
people generally like to be heard I mean
you know I don't know if you were
talking earlier about your Cypriot wife
you know oftentimes or I don't know if
you've seen that viral video about it's
the nail you know like the nail in the
woman's head and the guy is just trying
to say it's the nail and she just wants
to be she just wants to be heard right
yes and I mean if that story is very
gendered but men are very similar you
know you you just want your partner to
listen to you you you know it's my wife
and I will literally start conversations
by saying either I just want to be heard
right now or I actually want you to
solve it because we found if you don't
set that out right at the beginning you
are in for a world of hurt yes yes good
marriages will involve this capacity
either explicitly or implicitly and
that's exactly right and oftentimes just
five minutes of listening is all your
partner needs you know they just want to
share with you their problem in a shitty
day at work and they just want to tell
you about their day and it was awful and
there's nothing you can do to fix it and
they don't want you to fix it they just
want you to know they had a shitty day
at work and and then you and you listen
to them and then and it's just such a
simple thing to do anyway it's a very
valuable skill I learned this the
importance of listening from a
magnificent doctor at the Mount Auburn
Hospital when I was at medical school
man by the name of Matthew Carmody just
an extraordinary human being and a
magnificent clinician a master clinician
so when I was still in medical school
Matthew dr. Carmody taught me about how
to do this yeah that the ability to
listen I think is already pretty
extraordinary and I would imagine that
part of being good at that is also being
able to give people straight honest talk
there's somebody in my life right now
who is dying of pancreatic cancer very
rapidly talking about from diagnosis
he's I would say nearing end of life at
this point has is no longer pursuing
treatment and I think he was diagnosed
like two or three months ago I just post
the kickoff of kovat and the
just the the rapid bodily changes the
dramatic loss of weight is it's really
shocking and to know like to try to run
the experiments which is where this has
been interesting in my own life to try
to run the experiment when I'm doing
something to think what will I think
about this at you know the end of my
life is this something that I'm going to
regret is not something that I'm going
to regret and you begin to realize that
there really are like you you might
think that oh that won't apply to me but
there's so many things that just seem
Universal whether it's you know wanting
to be heard out or whether it's needing
to sort of come to terms with things
that you regret it is it's interesting
but you need that straight talk to
understand what is happening so that you
can begin that process like is that
something that doctors struggle with is
that an important part of the process to
just let people know what they can
expect
well my first book was on this topic it
was called Death Foretold prophecy and
prognosis and medical care and it was a
whole book about prognostication and the
formulation of prognosis which is the
first problem can the doctors formulate
an accurate and reliable prognosis
forget about whether they tell anybody
and the second are the chances of
communication can you are they willing
and able to communicate a prognosis and
of course many doctors misrepresent the
truth they either sugarcoat it and they
say everything is fine when it's not or
sometimes they do the opposite they do
something called hanging crepe they will
say the situation is more dire than they
think it is because then if the patient
does well the patient will think oh my
god what a great doctor you know I'm
living longer than the doctor predicted
which is incidentally this has been
discussed for thousands of years in the
practice of medicine so um what's the no
n approach because I actually get why
you well well what I would do I mean I
don't know the right approach first of
all what I would do is I always at used
to ask when I was seeing patients I
would ask them I would say something
like this and I wouldn't say it as fast
or as callously so ordinarily I would
say it in a very slower I would sit down
at the patient's bedside and I would
indicate with my body language I was
there for the duration till they were
they were done with me
it was much then Oh guys I would hold
their hands of course so interesting oh
goodness yes and III had of course a
personal your physician you examine
patients all the time
and but we're getting weird societally
about touch man I am way worried about
touching people that I don't know very
very well yeah that's a whole other
topic but in a professional situation
you know where of course you would sit
down at the bedside and and it's very
normal and human to hold her hand or we
often I would be my patients I would
have examined them or whatever but um so
you communicate with your body language
that you're there for the duration and
and then I would say something like and
I wouldn't say it quite as rapidly or as
directly but the gist of it would be
something like people vary in their
desire for information about what's
likely to happen to them some people
want a lot of information and some
people don't want very much information
at all what kind of patient do you think
you are and and they might say you know
actually doc I don't want to know
anything you know percentages do more
people want to know or more people most
people in our society say yes but it
also varies and it's ethnically
stratified so there are many many people
for example of Hispanic descent or or
Asian descent who say talk to my
children you know I don't want to
discuss that so um so there's a lot of
variation there's some variation most
people do want to know and then you also
have to recognize it's not a one-off
thing you know you if you've developed a
relationship with a patient you're gonna
see them again and there are ideas about
what they want to know will have changed
and their clinical circumstances will
have changed so you can discuss this
with them at some future point anyway
and then the question is how do you
communicate the bad news and there's a
magnificent book by Johns Hopkins
University Press it's called how to
break bad news by a Buckman is the guy's
last name can't remember his first name
is Robert or Richard right now anyway
it's an incredible book and it's
actually good in life in general its
intended for physicians and nurses on
how to break bad news but actually it's
just good in life in general if you want
to your teenagers want to tell your your
father or mother that you crash the car
how do you break the bad news there's
like good tips in there I'd like how to
do this and
they're number of Principles one of for
example is firing a warning shot so you
say you know i i'd like to talk to you
about some some some some serious
matters or you know I'm afraid I have
some unfortunate news so you fire a
warning shot you know you don't just
deliver the bad news you allocate time
like I said earlier you um also it's
crucial in the hospice care and caring
for patients that what a very important
thing is is a commitment to non
abandonment so both doctors and patients
especially but doctors too one of the
reasons they try they don't have these
conversations is they're afraid that the
doctor the patient the doctor will
abandon the patient if the patient is
dying let's say they're they're worried
that the doctor will just give up on
them so I was always very careful to say
you know I have this bad news and I
would deliver the bad news and and then
I would say but I promise I will not
abandon you and there's much that we can
do to address your condition even if we
cannot stop its course so you
communicate to the patient non
abandonment support there are things you
can do
empathy sympathy interest right there's
lots that's humanly available you know
even at the end of life so anyway we're
off on multiple tangents now this is old
work I used to do a long time ago yeah
and I came across Death Foretold when I
was doing research on you and I just I
find that part of your story so
interesting and so Raleigh human and one
thing I'm always trying to do when I
research somebody is to actually
understand them to understand their
worldview and just the the hospice thing
which is is an act of service so brand
like I don't know that that can be
overstated I know you may not perceive
it that way you actually did it but from
the outside like that seems patently
true and then when I go into what you're
doing from the looking at culture but
more importantly having ended up writing
that book as a way to try to get us to
as a society to focus on the good and
not the bad
good is even in the title right the
evolution of a good society it I can
feel you trying to help and be useful
which I find particularly interesting
very kind of you to say that honestly
it's a very kind thing you just said to
me
thank you it is I think it seems
accurate look we've never met before now
but it just seems to hold true and
everything that I've watched and read
about you leads me to that which I find
interesting what motivates people to do
what they do and to try as hard at the
things that they try and this seems like
a really interesting period in time for
somebody who focuses on the things you
focus on when I think about colonizing
Mars right you write extensively about
shipwrecks which okay that may be one of
your unintentional communities but you
also talk about commune so you know
looking at what's gonna happen in Mars
is interesting looking at what's going
on in AI so yeah I do some of the
robotics work in my lab too but but uh
we do some work on social robotics and
and and what we called um artificial
intelligence but the the Mars stuff when
I was AI I'm 58 and I thought I would
live long enough to see a human on Mars
you know when I was a boy I thought I
would live to see that it was so
important to me and I I don't think I'm
gonna live to see it and I'm so sad
about it because it's clear we're gonna
colonize Mars and I suspect in a hundred
years 200 years when we have sort of
colonies going
it'll be replaying of the new and old
world the colonists won't like having to
send resources back to the you know to
earth and they want independent
government and all of that stuff I'm
convinced will play itself out I think
we will eventually terraform Mars I
think it's inevitable there is I mean
there's technology to do it you know
take time and it's expensive now but
we'll get better and better at this and
you know initially we'll live in in the
bubbles that we construct there and
anyway that's all gonna happen
eventually but I would love to at least
live long enough for people to to you
know to witness a human being get
getting to Mars and I saw I saw the
Martian I've watched it a half dozen
times it's and you know with Matt Damon
and you know it's it's just
it's so deeply moving that movie and
imagining him on that surface as the
first person he goes everywhere I go I'm
the first person ever to have been here
you know anyway I thought that movie and
the book was magnificent it is a very
fascinating thing the whole idea of
humans striking out to have that
adventurous spirits we got to do that
but then understanding and being able to
provide oh by the colonies yes so in
fact I had in the book but I took it out
I the NASA has four years looked at
shipwrecks
as models for what would happen in an
isolated colony and and in fact there
been other experiments for example that
I discuss in the book the scientists
that's winter over on the South Pole
small communities of about 30 scientists
every year that winter over there so you
know how do these people get along and
so I discussed the shipwrecks
extensively in blueprint and I had a
whole section on the colonization of
space but I cut it out because the book
was already too long maybe I'll publish
it one day oh man that would be really
interesting and I'd love to know is NASA
talking about things like Pitcairn and
where I'll say that was a the everything
has to do with the exact people that go
for sure and your breakdown of
Shackleton and I've read the book
endurance it's [__] nominal talking
about how he that they were gone to like
two years or some guys raised the amount
of time but he was an extraordinary
leader and the men were at an
extraordinary spirit and they were able
to survive no one died it's unbelievable
unbelievable like people when you read
the book you like there's no way like
when you because you're reading it you
know in in a relatively short amount of
time so you don't think about the fact
that two years is a long [__] time to
be wet and to hold like it went cold and
not know if you're a better diet yes my
favorite my favorite story in the book
which I stumbled on is the story of the
Grafton in the enrico on the South
Auckland island in 1864 so it was almost
a perfect natural experiment two
shipwrecks on the same time on the same
island never encounter each other
totally different outcomes so on the
southern part
the island the grafton Rex five men wash
ashore they are they survived for a
couple of years and all make it off
alive on the in Rico nineteen men wash
ashore all but three of them die and
they're very different stories and and
what they did and how they did it you
know
was wonderful for me to read and III I
was even tempted to write a whole book
about just that contrast but I you know
I decided to just tell that brief
versions of their stories which are
amazing
even the brief version was really
fascinating in terms of so from my own
memory of reading Shackleton or
endurance how one he was trying to and
you talked about this in the book he was
giving people an opportunity to teach
each other so that one day you'd be hi
one minute Lowe the next and so created
what you refer to as Oh God
mild hierarchy yeah so I the the notion
of we need a hierarchy but if it gets
too crazy then people revolting and then
the other guy was all about every man
for himself and it became cannibalistic
and as and pretty crazy yes yes
Shackleton did lots of things that were
very interesting and his men did it
wasn't just him he was an extraordinary
leader but the men too were you know
very good with each other and this
notion of setting up schools so a lot of
the shipwrecks that did well were were
ones in which they set up a school where
they taught each other things and as you
as you summarized what happens in a
school is that today I'm teaching you
Norwegian tomorrow you're teaching me
algebra so we take turns being pupil and
an teacher and so it first of all it
stimulates our minds and but more
importantly it kind of keeps the
hierarchy you know on its toes so I'm
not like despotically ruling over you
and so many of the successful wrecks and
isolated parties had this quality of of
teaching which is also connects with the
other theme of the book which we opened
our conversation with today about
teaching so I want to talk about
Pitcairn and how it relates to what
they're doing in
Antarctica so Pitcairn which is the
aftermath of mutiny on the bounty right
I'm guessing so they end up basically
allocating women to the men and it turns
into like this whole disaster as some of
the women died and so they yes the men
are taking women from other men and it
devolves into basically all-out water
they all hide one man survives they kill
each other everyone else dies yes except
with all the men die but yes so taking
that notion and running with it
especially and I'm asking this of
somebody knowing that you do work or at
least you you understand the world of
like sex robots and things like that how
I do not do any research on sex robots I
have done work on human robot
interactions but all right fair enough
fair enough
you you do work in AI as well right yes
I do okay so sort of a inevitable
outcome that I have heard you speak on
is you know where this goes with sex
robots and and what is interesting to me
is in how this all comes back to the
culture that we end up creating and this
moment in history being particularly an
interesting moment for culture could end
up going we may be approaching a
cultural event horizon beyond which we
cannot see and we don't know sort of
where this is going yeah so bringing it
back as NASA or whoever starts thinking
about colonies on Mars and looking at
what's going on already in Antarctica do
they take sexual relations into
consideration okay so first of all I
don't know
I'm sure NASA is discussing and thinking
about this if they send because even in
the olden days they used to think in a
very sort of heterosexist way they would
imagine that if they send same-sex
parties up they would be no sex but of
course you can have sex you could have
sex with the same-sex person so that
doesn't necessarily solve the problem or
the issue of sexual relations so I think
an ass I'm sure is considering this and
may even send up some couples I'm not
privy to their discussions although now
that you mentioned and I'm curious what
they're thinking is it's probably some
government report that one could
obtained that if any listener finds or
no such report they should email it to
me
I'm curious to read what what NASA says
about sexual relations during space
exploration and I note with interest
that that the astronaut I think it's
Mark Kelly is running for no it's it's
his brother I can't remember who's
running for a Senate in Arizona right
now anyway
sex robots let's go back so uh so the
issue there the intellectual issue there
is we are in the midst of creating as
you suggested what I call hybrid systems
of humans and machines so what we're
doing is is we're creating groups of
people into which we've interspersed
forms of artificial intelligence like
online you can imagine a network of
humans and some BOTS and we've done some
research on this topic in fact in my lab
or in the real world you could imagine
humans and a machine like a physical you
know humanoid robot for example and
we've also done some work with that in
my lab in partnership with Brian's
Castle Eddie's a lab at Yale he's a
robot assist at Yale and what we're
interested in is not how do we optimize
the AI or the robots to interact with
you we're not interested in human
robotic dyadic interactions what we're
interested instead is how does the
addition of robots to a system change
human human interactions does the
addition of artificial intelligence into
our midst change how we treat each other
let me give you a couple of examples the
simplest one first imagine that you are
devising an Alexa device or some kind of
a robotic as a digital assistant and
you're the manufacturer of this device
you probably don't want to make the
device require a lot of politeness on
the part of its owners for example you
you don't have to say excuse me Alexa
I'm very sorry to interrupt you you know
could you please do me a favor
I need to know what the weather is you
could just say Alexa weather and the
obedient device responds okay now the
problem is if I'm only thinking about
how you interact with the device this
might be fine but now I imagine that
your children use this device and they
learn to be rude and then they go to the
playground and they're rude to other
children
okay so the human human interactions
have been modified by the addition of
this type of robotic equipment or
intelligence into our midst okay so
that's a simple example of the idea that
I'm discussing with you these hybrid
systems of humans and machines how do
the human human interactions change as a
result of the addition of the machines
now the sex robot case is very
interesting because experts and that's
not me
have looked at this topic and have come
to different conclusions some people
think that the addition of sex robots
will degrade human human sexual
interactions because they think that
once you become accustomed to having sex
with a robot you are not going to be
able to have enjoyable sex with another
human being you know you're gonna be a
why do they say that I'm not even saying
I disagree by the way but I'm just
curious
maybe the robot is extremely obedient
and you don't need to worry about it
feel robot climax is for example you
know you're just very selfish when you
have sex with a robot and those are not
good qualities but doesn't that so that
gives me pauses somebody who's outside
the world and has really studied this I
naturally gravitate towards your opinion
which is at a purely biological level
50% the part that you can't change is
just you want to be good you want to
connect so what I hear in that argument
is there is actually a collision between
that part of you that wants friendship
that longs for connection that hungers
for those the the rewards nature has
given us for being a social animal right
that had to be Pleasant so it feels good
is colliding with something else the the
desire to be selfish for things to be
facile than ever and that that that
facile and selfishness is actually
winning out over the other side which is
there's something rings true about that
but is distress
yeah I see the connection you're making
although that's not where I would have
taken the argument as this early and if
you'll allow me I'll come back to that
in a moment so I just want to finish
this first moment please
because other people say no the addition
of sex high functioning realistic sexual
robots into our society will be a good
thing because it'll allow people for
example to become better lovers they'll
practice with a robot and then they'll
have better sex with humans or it will
allow them to do experiment with things
that are prohibited like you know
threesomes or same-sex encounter
if they you know you you you you want to
experiment with the same sex experience
but you don't actually want to do with a
human maybe you'll try it out with a
robot first kind of thing so another you
know want to let whatever people might
be willing to do things with robots they
wouldn't do with humans so there's a
group of people and I can't remember if
I discuss this in the book or not it was
this in blueprint I don't remember maybe
I do discuss I've heard you talk and
read the book so sometimes I forget what
I heard in the book I'm going to speak
about suffragette I can't remember
either right now but anyway so so I
don't know actually how it will work but
what I can tell you is that the addition
of forms of robotic intelligence into
our midst are going to have an effect
for better worse or both on human human
interactions and it behooves us to think
about this and in fact in an article I
had in the Atlantic maybe that's where I
made this argument I talked about how we
might need a new kind of social contract
basically with machines like if we're
gonna design machines these machines
need to obey what I call the social
suite in blue in the book blueprint this
this corpus of qualities that we evolved
to be able to live together we would not
want to engineer machines that don't
obey those principles it's like it's
like you know it's like era like Isaac
Asimov's it's like a fourth law you know
you don't want robots to do stuff that
harms our society you know it's not just
that you don't want them to you know
harm humans by any act or omission you
and you don't just want to teach them to
obey humans you actually want them not
to harm society by anything they do so
anyway that's the whole hybrid systems
argument on your point about how this
intersects with the other ideas we've
been discussing about innate tendencies
to good and and bad and selfishness and
generosity I mean I think the answer is
that you know we have both of those
qualities all human beings do and our
societies do too and my claim is not
that these vices don't exist my claim is
merely that the virtues in toto are more
powerful than the vices so I haven't
done I haven't thought a lot about this
so I'll be thinking out loud here
definitely punch holes in my thinking if
you see them this is we're talking where
I come out on this so it seems to me
that there
a difference between happiness and
fulfillment just to give words to it yes
I'll define happiness is as amazing but
very ephemeral it's temporary so I often
refer to that as the bowl of ice cream
so a bowl of ice cream is amazing my
best friend one of my closest friends I
have two best friends
his is Dan Gilbert who wrote the book
stumbling unhappiness he's a famous
psychologist so I the bowl of ice cream
in a bowl if there's a bowl of cherries
on the cover of his book but anyway go
on unfortunately I have allergic
reaction to cherries so cherries to me
are yes so it's ready right but there
are second-order consequences and so
just going in on the bowl of ice cream
isn't necessarily gonna make you feel
good and I would say over time it
actually ends up making people feel
badly about themselves so then you've
got fulfillment on the other side which
is often born of suffering and doing
difficult things going to the gym
everyday not eating a bowl of ice cream
like those things will end up making you
feel good about yourself serving people
like you did in hospice it's like man if
at the end of your life you don't look
back on that and say [__] I feel so good
that I did that like I have served these
people and however your mom is
intertwined in that if there's some
element of I have helped people in a way
that she wasn't helped or whatever
obviously we haven't discussed that but
like that to me it had to have been hard
but I have to believe that like in
moments of crisis like that's something
that you can lean on and say yo I I have
done that it's a beautiful thing yes and
and and builds part of who you are and
how you see yourself and what you value
so forth so when I think about the
friction in the human-animal between
doing what is easy doing what a selfish
doing what is quick I get the impulse
that I'll call that sort of falls into
the happiness bucket but then over here
like if if you only live here if you are
demanding of your sex robot and your sex
robot has no sense of like doing well by
culture and society at large it's like
that will end up you even if you only
ever have sex with your sex robot which
I did not expect to go this deep on this
conversation
but even if you only have sex with your
sex robot you won't feel the things that
you could feel over on the other side so
even though momentarily it makes sense
to be selfish and all of that after a
while that internal feeling that you
have will end up being I think one of
isolation and loneliness and all of that
because there is no sense of partnership
and it ultimately becomes that sense of
partnership that's more meaningful so
first of all my train of thought I was
just trying to look up for a moment
because I'm I went to high school with
one of the key figures in Westworld the
actor who in Westworld which not jeffrey
wright oh Jesus
yeah you went to college every right I
did and he's a wonderful man and I can't
believe if he hears this it is ya know
easy in yeah yeah so the whole thing in
in in West world
I forgot how we got onto this now why
was I trying to remember we were talking
about sex robots I'm saying happiness
versus fulfillment so don't just be
selfish even with your sex robot yeah
but I mean the but I mean that whole
film that whole movie that hold a TV
program explore some of the themes were
discussing not so much or even just a
sex robot issue but more generally you
know what does it mean to be human and
and actually it explores you know in
humanity you know how you know I mean
they're very deep themes being explored
in that movie and I and I think Jeffrey
is just a phenomenal actor in general
especially though in that but anyway I'm
sorry I've lost the the we're getting
the part of the conversation where now
we're like so many tangents on so many
tangents I've had a wonderful
conversation with you and it's the range
the range is deploying my mind right now
but I don't want to end on the topic of
sex robots but I can't remember we're
talking about a more profound topic what
I'm what I'm trying to get to the sex
robot to me is is just one sort of thing
that shows how we have to think about
culture
we evolved because we're in this weird
moment where we're gonna have a lot of
decisions to make whether it's what do
we program ai which i think is that's
that's what I think we should talk about
now because what's interesting to me is
you think about robotics and you think
about artificial intelligence is you
have to give I'll use very layman's
terms forgive me I'm sure these are all
along but you have to give the AI an
impetus you have to give it a desire you
have to give it a goal there has to be
something that it's going to make
decisions based on like when you think
about humans I'm sure you're aware of
this if you destroy the human ability to
feel an emotion which of course some
people have specific brain damage that
leaves them without the ability to feel
emotions they cannot make a decision
they can sit there and tell you you know
if we had fish for lunch like it would
be good because you know it's a lean
source of protein and I think that's
important I've had a lot of beef
recently but you know if we have beef
it's actually a great source of fat now
and they they can't do it because
there's no emotion for them to push them
in one direction or another
so with AI I think ultimately we're
gonna have to decide like what are those
things by which it makes decisions like
what are its goals why not hurt a human
right you have to program that into it
yeah I mean I think yeah we're far from
having that kind of capacity with
artificial intelligence don't you see
that as an inevitable place where it
will get yes yes I think eventually will
will be doing that and I have a
partnership with a group called them
that did this very famous set of
experiments called the moral machines
project some some listeners may have
done you can go to this website and do
these little tests where there's a robot
driving a car in the car it has to make
an ethical choice and you have to help
program the robot by expressing your
views about what kind of lives should be
gained or lost so it's how do we endow
these machines with a sign of moral
sentiment and and I and I'm blocking on
God's name right now too is rawan yatra
in' he's a wonderful computer scientist
who's now moved from MIT to - to Europe
and he's continuing some of this work
but anyway so and we had a paper we had
a paper in nature called machine
behavior
a year two ago that sort of laid out
some of these ideas like how should
machines be programmed to behave and so
on
anyhow so so but but in getting back to
your question we're far from needing to
actually address these questions I mean
we we you know barely are getting to the
point where we can do natural language
processing in a really fluid way you
know my dictation device when I use this
thing to dictate still as ten percent of
the words are wrong when I speak to it
you know
so we're far from if we can't do that
simple thing word you know the idea that
we're gonna need to endow this my word
processing software with a moral chimp
is you know we're far from that so I'm
not I don't spend too much time thinking
about that but I do spend time thinking
about in my lab and doing work on how
the machines can affect our morality how
we treat each other so for example we've
done some work on how the addition of
what we called uh may I so so what my
lab is trying to do is not invent super
smart AI to replace human cognition or
even now that I'm talking to you some
kind of super moral AI that could be
like a moral exemplar know what we're
doing is is we're developing we're not
inventing super smart AI to replace
human cognition we're developing what I
called uh may I
to supplement human interaction the
machines don't have to be smart
we're smart the machine just have to
help us not be bad to each other and
we've done many experiments we did
another paper in nature in 2017 showing
that we could program robots in a very
specific way autonomous agents online to
help groups of people coordinate their
actions and work better together and
some of our ideas are useful as well in
optimizing communication between humans
decreasing racism online how do we get
people to use less racist invective how
do we optimize how do we how do we
optimize the flow of honest information
and truthful information online the idea
is is that you can you can program these
robots or these forms of artificial
intelligence to work in simple ways
using only local knowledge about the
network they're in distributed
throughout the network and they act like
traffic
cops you know they kind of kind of speed
up and slow things down just a little
and they can kind of change the overall
dynamics of the system I'm super curious
so I'm gonna push them because I really
want to understand it so they I'll give
you the example and I'm fortunately I I
have to go in just a little bit the the
experiment we did one of the experiments
actually let me let me pick a more
recent experiment so we had a recent
experiment we did with Brian's castle at
his lab and this was work spearheaded by
Maggie treeger in my lab and Sarah SIBO
and Brian's lab in this experiment a
groups of four were formed three people
in one humanoid robot and they were
given a task which was to a game to play
on tablets which was to lay railroad
track and they played 30 rounds of this
game and they had to work together to
lay track from point A to point B and
there were straight parts and curved
parts and so on and they would take
turns laying a piece of track and we
contrived it so that occasionally the
robot would make a mistake and we also
contrived it so that the human sometimes
would have to make a mistake there was
no part available to them so that they
would have to goof so people would have
to take turns being the member of the
team that was responsible for the team
not succeeding on that round and
sometimes it was a robot and sometimes
it was a human and then what we did is
we experimentally manipulated the robots
behavior so that sometimes the robot
would be vulnerable the robot would
crack a joke or the robot would say
something like you know you think that
robots are perfect but as you can see
I'm terrible at this game you know
something like that
and what we found when we did that was
that the humans started not treating the
robot differently like oh no this is a
sweet robot let me be nice to it no they
started treating each other differently
than programming the robot to express
vulnerability in its expressions in a
challenging situation optimize the
communication between the humans and we
were able to show for example that the
humans were kinder to each other they
shared more equally in the conversations
they had all these other desirable
outcomes that paper was just published
like four months ago or three months ago
it's like a form of priming your right
to connect it to that literature but no
I don't think it's priming it's
something different it's like modifying
the social dynamics by thoughtful
programming of these agents and you know
it would be like if you're trying to if
you're trying to build a physical robot
that's helping you move heavy logs you
would use principles of you know of
fulcrums to position you know the lever
action the lever of whatever well if you
understand the principles of human
interaction then you can position the
robot so that it supports you know good
functioning by the people we've done
many experiments like this we we've done
experiments where we've not with robots
but other experiments where we've
manipulated the structure of human
social interactions and maybe I'll end
with this so so most people are familiar
from high school chemistry of the idea
that there leave there more than two but
let's consider two forms of carbon and
if you take the carbon atoms and
assemble them one way into the form of
graphite sheets of hexagonal carbon
atoms you have graphite which is soft
and dark or you could take the same
carbon atoms and assemble them a
different way in tetrahedrons in the
form of diamond and you get Diamond
which is hard and clear and there are
two key intellectual ideas there first
these properties of softness and
darkness and hardness and clearness are
not properties of the carbon atoms
they're properties of the collection of
carbon atoms and second which properties
you get depends on how you connect the
carbon atoms to each other you take the
carbon atoms and you connect them one
way you get one set of properties take
the same carbon atoms and connect them a
different way you get a different set of
properties and it's the same with human
groups we've shown in my lab using
experiments that I can take a group of
people and I connect them one way and
they're mean sons of [__] to each
other and selfish and they lie and they
don't cooperate or I take the same
people and connect them a different way
and they're sweet and kind to each other
so these properties you see that we
think of as individual virtues are
actually social virtues whether people
cooperate with each other or not is not
just about cooperative people it's about
cooperative networks these are emergent
properties of social systems these are
properties that are arise not because of
who
but because of how we are connected and
so there's a tremendous amount of work
we do in my lab to try to understand
this and in the book blueprint I
explained how we evolved to build
networks and to build practices that
allow us in the end to be very kind to
each other and then and so my my
essential argument in the book is that
the arc of our evolution is long but it
bends towards goodness that is the
perfect place to end Nikolas how to
still bottle bully this was so much fun
man thank you thank you for coming on
and hopefully we will get to discuss
Apollo's arrow in the very near future
I'm excited that you've got another one
coming out dude everybody watching thank
you so much for joining if you haven't
already be sure to subscribe and until
next time my friends be legendary take
care the same things happen over and
over again through time for basically
the same reasons a lot of these things
happen once in a lifetime